and I'm the creative development
director at gray area in which capacity
I run the education artist incubator and
research Labs I am here on the stage to
introduce Caroline Cinders who I have
had the pleasure of working with over
the past few years at gray area Caroline
is an award-winning critical designer
researcher and artist for the past few
years she has been examining the
intersections of artificial intelligence
intersectional Justice systems design
harm and politics in digital
conversational spaces and Technology
platforms she has worked with the United
Nations Amnesty International IBM Watson
the Wikimedia foundation and others she
is a pretty extensive bio but what I
wanted to tell you about her is that we
are super excited not to just welcome
her to this talk she's about to give you
but we have been co-designing a
curriculum with Caroline called the
responsible technology design intense
that's a 10-week course that takes
students through exploring all the
different elements of ethical technology
design and we have a few other people
that are involved
KDM and Sarah sorry what was your last
name Sarah aoun so we have some amazing
teachers Caroline's in charge of this
whole thing it's part of a grant we have
with the Gila foundation so we are super
excited for that to start in the coming
months it's going to be coming up very
soon and I'm just super like Caroline is
the person if you want to learn and
understand about bias harm reduction and
safety online so without further Ado I
would like to welcome my friend and
colleague Caroline Cinders to the stage
thank you so much for that lovely
introduction Nikki I appreciate it
um hi hi everyone I'm Caroline cinders
um Nikki gave a fantastic introduction
I'm Caroline I'm an artist and
researcher and one of the things I like
to sort of start with is uh why I take
such an interdisciplinary approach and
so part of that is my background my
background is in photojournalism and
then I got a master's in design and
technology so like by combining
photojournalism research design and art
I see everything through this lens of
legibility and research storytelling
which are skills I honed as a
photojournalist and so with these skills
I make art and I do human rights
research focusing through the lens of
how design and Technology affect people
and their everyday lives
um and this is my current workflow this
is how I approach problem solving across
everything I do I want to make research
and that includes even things like data
or data sets because I find research to
be practical it can create something
that wasn't there before contest a
hypothesis to see if it works or if it
doesn't but then the next step is
activism because it builds off that
practical research and activism is
helpful it helps push Society forward
and finally I take that activism and
research and I distill it into something
else which is art a poetry that is
necessary to help the world function can
help create new future imaginaries
pulling from these two other steps
another way I think of my art
is um something I call research driven
art which is exactly what it sounds like
it's art that's shaped and driven by
research be it quantitative or
qualitative
often people are I think an immediate
assumption we make with something like
research driven art is that it could be
data driven or data visualization but I
don't make data visualization but I
could but a way I think about it is what
if you made net art or technology-based
art with the same principles as
photojournalism so like photojournalism
research driven art uses specific
structures and a sense of purpose to
constrain it these constraints work much
like how a skeleton Works while they
stabilize the practice just as a rib
cage stabilizes the body they do not
Define the entire practice nor keep it
from moving and flexing on its own so in
this way the research I do stabilizes
and shapes my art but it does not
dictate the outcome
because these gifts are playing because
I can't see the gifts playing
I don't have eyes on the back of my head
um in late May 2020 after the United
States erupted and protests for black
lives matter and after George Floyd's
death I saw a number of curators and
critics remark on social network about
the role of tech artists and unpacking
technology and Justice and activism but
most of the technology artists they were
mentioning happen to be white and male
just something I made a note of so I
reached out over email to my friend the
curator and writer nor Khan
we started discussing artistic practices
during moments of cultural upheaval so
in this email Nora wrote to me quote how
might critical technological work be
called on in this moment to do more
coded design work has that capacity
hybrid research practices can explain
and expose the Logics of racial
capitalism but under the auspices of
artistic collaboration can that critique
make an argument through process and
through a built system
so this idea of usefulness and
interdisciplinary work is a key and
necessary part of a research driven arts
practice it's directly extremely
inspired by Tanya bargeras arteutil
methodology which means utilitarian art
eutil draws on artistic thinking to
imagine and create and Implement tactics
that can change how we act in society
again heavily focused on usefulness on
tool building and on communities this is
something Nora also highlighted in her
email talking about the strengths of
work that can stretch across many
different domains in her words making
art that's necessary Trojan Horse to
discuss useful change
this is where I turn to the work of
American Artist Francis Singh Joanna
Mall Adam Harvey mimia Noha forensic
architecture and others these artists
are pulling from a research or
investigatory based practices and with
work that manifests into a variety of
outputs artifacts writings and
educations and all of those outputs we
can think of as artistic outputs even if
it's not like a hard art artifact a
workup a workshop or an artifact of
Education can be a part of an arts
practice
I also this is where we can look at the
practices perhaps together of American
artists or stop spying La as two related
practices even though they're from two
different groups and two different
practitioners because they're both great
examples of a social justice and human
rights-driven art practice who stops
buying's work focusing on community
organizing against surveillance
surveillance in the police in Los
Angeles or American artists work I'm
blue if I was blank I would die and my
blue window two pieces that comment on
the structure and violence of modern
police forces and so under this space of
research driven art and Arte util these
works are much closer together than they
are farther apart
other examples of a social justice
research and artistic practice are works
like the hidden life of an Amazon user
by Joanna mole or Adam Harvey's reframe
research which came out of his numerous
collaborations with the human rights
archiving group mnemonic formerly known
as the Syrian archive or the
investigative work of forensic
architecture one example of a research
and social justice based art practice is
Mimi and nohos anoha's research work on
the politics and injustices of data sets
have resulted in artworks like the
library of missing data sets and the
Xenon educational tool the people's
guide to AI co-written with Deanna J
nusada these pieces and artists occupy
liminal space of research journalism and
art
and this is where I start to think of
these two perhaps being combined of an
arts practice and a design practice
and so looking at this research driven
art I start to look at this through the
lens of design which often prompts why
design because everything around us is
designed from how we physically entered
this room to how in a later panel there
will be a zoom meeting uh to why we can
or cannot block people on slack we can't
block them and how information is
presented to us on Twitter and how the
world surrounds us design is incredibly
political when we think of how it
manifests into everything we can touch
this slide is a cheeky nod to Don Norman
in the design of everyday objects and in
the design world there's this assumption
that design is universal seamless and
intuitive when it is most definitely not
in some cases design makes these doors
appear they Function One Way
so why does design matter when we talk
about technology or digital harm
because design can Elevate and obfuscate
design isn't a skill but a practice in a
language in and of itself so to start
solving problems around complex issues
and creating spaces for human connection
design needs to also be at the equal
Forefront of this conversation design is
what distills code and policy into
digestible and interactive and
understandable interfaces for users so
design is that thing that explains what
code and policy are outlining
I think we can see this in online
harassment reporting interstitials the
idea here is that users don't have to
deeply understand a social Network's
policy on harassment in order to report
it design takes the technical
infrastructure the actual ability to
select a piece of content click on it
and then click on what bucket it falls
into as well as the political
infrastructure the policy what kind of
harassment or harm the content falls
into and describing the platform policy
in a way that's short and understandable
to users and then folds all of that into
uh into product design the harassment
reporting system
security settings are another example
for users to report content they
shouldn't have to be a lawyer and to
adjust security settings they shouldn't
have to be an engineer so design makes
these complexities understandable design
affects things like policy for example
in an area of deceptive design or also
known as dark patterns dark patterns are
design patterns and unintentionally or
or intentionally trick users into making
decisions they normally wouldn't make
and have started to be focused on
finally in the policy circles just only
over the last two or three years this is
something that designers have known
about for years one of the things I want
to show for example right now is how
design effect affects policy this is an
example of a pop-up from the European
Union's gdpr the general data protection
regulation this is a very common dark
pattern we still see today
oh
is it
not sure what happened
I'll keep going okay so you see two
buttons here
um one is except all cookies it really
sticks out to you
um but this sort of looks like almost
like a binary choice you can either
accept or click on cookie settings to
learn more but when you click that's
where the actual sort of more consensual
more legible buttons are are hidden so
this is what makes this a dark pattern
the actual consent button if you want to
opt out is hidden
so then why design can a door be
political I think it can be can it be
art perhaps well what does art do it
transports us it's poetic it analogizes
it creates artifacts of visual
interpretation it's not necessarily
direct or didactic didactic but it can
be it is different from design but it
also aims to achieve different things
how can design be art so for me I was
raised in the United States and I went
to school in the US and so the way that
design has always been sort of shown and
articulated to me is design is useful
but profitable and exists in a different
space than art but design is so much
more than that and affects so much more
than that
this is where I turn to critical design
and speculative design critical design
is designed that addresses the
limitations of product design and was a
term coined in 1997 by Anthony Dunn and
it comes from a practice he developed
with Fiona rabi when they were research
fellows at the Royal College of Art
critical design demands that design
stopped existing in terms of capitalist
production where it is a function of
just product design said push product
design towards self-examination and
cultural critique by redefining how
product design can be created critical
design also creates new ways for an
audience to engage with design and
understand all different facets of
design in their everyday lives
so again this is where it all comes
together so we can look at the work of
June and rabi Mimi Noha Adam Harvey
forensic architecture or American Artist
and we can view these Works solely as
art or as research but they're much more
richly seen when viewed together as this
interdisciplinary practice and again
this is where design and art Come
Together The Works aren't just to Bear
witness though that alone would be
worthwhile they question and provocate
and sometimes offer a potential solution
to a problem but this should not be
viewed as a form of techno-solutionism
these Solutions the artists provide are
not meant to create an end-all be-all to
other Solutions but serve to rather
offer temporary or open source fixes for
gaps in inequity and violence created by
society and thus become poetic Witnesses
of those gaps this is a kind of Band-Aid
in a similar space where I pursue my own
practice Band-Aids exist as necessary
provocations or patches while
participatory design deconstruction with
artists human rights researchers
activists and technologists can overhaul
the system or destroy systems together
this togetherness and collaboration is
key though but nonetheless provocations
with an art and design can create
imaginaries for new realities
I'm going to quickly show you some
projects and where they where they came
from
um one of the things I also sort of want
to ground this in is I've spent the past
um almost actually now nine years
studying online harassment and thinking
about how systems create harassment I
look at the affordances of Technology do
ux and UI decisions mitigate harassment
can they amplify it and how does that
affect the policy around things like
online harassment and I think that
design does affect areas of allowing
users to create safety think about if
you were being harassed what does the
system actually allow you to do what can
you do to create safety in that space
and can you actually be safe
some of my research focuses on the
harassment of everyday users and then
journalists who face really large
threats like governmental censorship or
surveillance and you know all the way
down to what we can think of as sadly
more regular harassment and then things
like harassment campaigns This research
has been supported by a variety of
different organizations and this
research work also inspires art as well
I'm going to show you a few different
projects so this is something I worked
with hyphen Labs on in 2019 called
higher resolutions when we were the lead
artist for the Tate exchange of the Tate
modern High resolutions ran for two
weeks in 2019 and we used interactive
artwork and talks and workshops from
artists International technology experts
to examine the state of power and
privacy online from widespread
surveillance to how AI is shaping human
culture and relationships to threats
from emerging technology that can pose
to human rights artists and speakers
came from Amnesty International the BBC
the Carnegie trust Article 19 and
privacy International and other
organizations
a major reason I was so excited to work
with hyphen Labs other than that they're
very good friends and really wonderful
people was the ability to bring policy
researchers and political activists and
Watchdog groups directly into our
artistic collaboration have that set in
a very specific institutional setting
it's important when creating activists
and social justice work as artists to
avoid replicating unintentionally work
done by activists out in the field
instead we can work directly with those
activists so when fighting things like
data surveillance a way to create
changes to work together and create new
levels of pressure in the public and
arts institutions are a necessary part
of that believer we need to avoid
creating work done alone in the space of
Art and see collaboration with other
activists and researchers working on
identical causes and issues
and so another example of a research
driven arts practice is my own project a
feminist data set which started in 2017
as a response to the many documented
cases of problems in technology and bias
and machine learning it's a critical
research and art project that examines
every step of the machine learning
pipeline using intersectional feminism
as the framework of investigation and we
are inspired by the maker movement the
critical engineering Manifesto and apc's
feminist principles of the internet if
you don't know APC I definitely
recommend checking them out they're a
human rights NGO focusing mainly on the
majority world and they've put out a lot
of really important work on data
feminism
feminist infrastructure Fitness
technology and feminist principles of
the internet
so feminist data set is this multi-year
project it's trans-inclusive and
focusing on racial justice but it's it's
extremely process driven so the outputs
of the project or the artifacts are
workshops on data and machine learning
the workshops are key since they're a
mechanism to Think Through what
Community Driven Equitable data
collection could look like in the
workshops we discussed well what is
intersectional data what does it mean
what is an intersectional way to gather
data along with like the data itself
that we're Gathering we talk about
Professor Kimberly crenshaw's work the
creator of the term intersectional
intersectionality
but because it's a test a text-based
data set we also have to unpack well
what is intersectionality and writing
for example let's take an article about
income inequality an intersectional
feminist article would highlight that
white women black women indigenous women
Latino women and trans folks of all
different races are paid different
amounts so an article that simply
represents all women as a monolith is
not intersectional and cannot be in the
data set
so it's uh the project is sort of like
the antithesis of normal data collection
it's really about slow data you have to
really read and think about well does
intersectionality actually manifest into
the text itself versus is the article on
something that feels feminist
within our workshops community members
and research and submit written data be
it poems texts blogs transcripts of
conversations whatever the only time my
hand is the creator appears is to remove
non-intersectional data and I'm
extremely firm about this racist and
turfs need not apply
Infamous dataset operates in a similar
vein to Thomas tweet's toaster project
which you see here a critical design
project in which twaites builds a
commercial toaster from scratch
promoting iron ore to creating a new
plastic toaster body mold
Infamous data set is taking this
critical and artistic view on software
what does it mean to thoughtfully make
with machine learning to carefully
consider every angle of making iterating
and designing
every step of this process seems to be
thoroughly re-examined and like toaster
it has to actually work but also like
the toaster my software will be as
misshapen as this toaster
part of the project is dealing with
failure can you actually have Fitness
technology what are the concessions you
make for example we are having to use
AWS I'm using a Mac lap laptop is this a
piece of feminist technology probably
not so part of it is also dealing with
where does ideology sort of meet the
reality of making and what are those
concessions so it's not afraid of
failure but instead sort of greeting
that and stating even if we have these
best intentions this is what it actually
looks like when you start to apply it
a second iteration of feminist data set
is called trk
or technically responsible knowledge is
that going
yeah there we go okay cool
um sorry I was like is it playing I
don't know who knows
um trk is an open source project that
examines wage inequality and creates an
open source alternative to data labeling
and training which is a part of the
feminist data set now focusing on data
labeling which is what we have to do
with our data set sort of clean our data
set label it to eventually generate a
model so we're looking at the systemic
issues around labor and invisibility and
the creation of maintaining data
structures and training data algorithmic
models trk was funded by the Mozilla
foundation and was created with KDM Ian
or no fuma and rainbow unicorn we
started a lot of this work in 2019 where
I interviewed research labs and artists
and startups who use Mechanical Turk
style services and micro service workers
across crowd flower fiber Mechanical
Turk I even became a mechanical turker
myself for a few months
so trk is this alternative on data set
training and labeling which is a time
consuming but integral aspect of machine
learning that must be completed in part
by a human the tool offers a wage
calculator to help visualize a livable
wage for those that would be completing
the tasks so as an artist who uses AI as
a material to make an Explorer art I was
struck by how many startups research
labs and artists use Mechanical Turk
style platforms without that much
thought given to the payment structure
determined for workers on the network so
Mechanical Turk and similar platforms
have well-documented cases of horrendous
worker related issues such as severely
underpaid contracts in many instances if
a lab or individual is trying to price
equitably the the interface of
Mechanical Turk works against it since
it's not including time of the task so
for example say I asked one of you to
help me de-install gray area and I said
oh I'm going to pay you a hundred
dollars if it's a five minute you know D
install that's a really good deal but if
it's three days that's not a great deal
at all so time has this really direct
impact in terms of how we think about
pricing
if the machine learning pipeline is
death by a Thousand Cuts I think of
trk's one very very small Band-Aid for
one very very small cut because the
project doesn't propose a solution for
all issues related to machine learning
or even a major one for Amazon's
Mechanical Turk because so many issues
related to machine learning are issues
of a deeper more ingrained societal
inequity that can only be addressed
perhaps through large shifts and
restructuring in society or legislation
um
but within that as a designer and artist
I try to look at what kinds of research
work can help Elevate or expose those
issues so trk focuses on how through
pricing structures platform incentives
and the invisible nature of gig work
clients under price undervalue and
fundamentally misunderstand how tasks
are handled in these human as a service
platforms so part of the design thinking
behind trk is trying to examine equity
and transparency within interfaces in
the design of tools and what kinds of
problems ux and UI create in technology
we're inspired by the data sheets for
data sets white paper so trk injects
plain text information into the data set
with information that includes a
description of what a data set is and
when it was made
user experience design is a utilitarian
intelligence focusing on architectural
layouts usability and user flow but
design has a politics to it it can
suppress or uplift content design much
like technology isn't neutral so as an
artist I use design as a material to cut
to confront and comment on the slickness
and inequity of for-profit Technologies
and so one of the things I think a lot
about is the role of a designer and
where we sort of sit
and I think design is a tool much like
technology and much like art and it can
create political small acts of
resistance and change what kinds of
design can we make we stop viewing it
through a western Silicon Valley
neoliberal and capitalist lens we've
seen code and art made without the
constraints of capitalism and it's time
for design to do that as well so
critical design social justice and
design Justice are needed now more than
ever for Tool making it's time for
design to confront how its perpetuated
white supremacy and change its
relationships to power
design can be an actuator for change but
design alone is not an entire solution
towards confronting Injustice in society
design needs to confront that it has a
problem while acknowledging it's a part
of the problem design can help visualize
or highlight parts of systemic Injustice
but design must unpack its role in
contributing to Injustice in technology
especially in Silicon Valley
I use design as an artistic practice and
as a lever to create usefulness to
explore problem solving
and I think there's one of the tools
that really sticks out to me that also
does something similar is Everest
pumpkins tool to blur images for people
to use at protests so design and Tool
making can sit in a space to solve small
problems that are part of a larger a
bigger space and bigger issues
so my approach to design thinking is
proposing a decommodification of Art and
situating it in a process of
Investigation artistic practice
practices to Artistic approaches to
problems allow for collaborations that
might not happen in other fields and
this way Art's role in social justice
and human rights projects makes space
for new kinds of work in a way that
other fields traditionally could not let
those projects exist what does change
look like it has to be interdisciplinary
across many fields of art activism
policy and social justice working
together and not separately thank you
thanks so much Caroline
um
okay sweets
um uh you guys should all check out
Caroline's piece in the back it's called
within the terms and conditions and it
represents a really laborious research
project where Caroline explored the
violations of YouTube's terms and
conditions